University Preparatory Academy








AP Psychology Summer Assignment








Joel Jaison
Ms. Gavin
AP Psychology
7/30/19
Blink: The Power of Thinking Without Thinking Reflection
	The main idea that this book discusses is the topic of  “thin slicing”. A sentence should not end in like? Another test for like! First is a dead word. Thin slicing is basically the innate ability of the human subconscious to take in sensory cues, such as sounds and sights, and make a judgement or decision based on the little information gathered. The way the book presents thin slicing is as an alternative to strenuous data collection, which the author deems as unreliable. The first example of thin slicing given is in the case of a Kouros statue purchased by the Getty museum. The researchers and scientists that analyzed the statue believed it to be true due to months of research and testing. However, when shown to art historians and professionals, they were able to deduce instantly that the statue was fake, subverting months of careful research. They did this through thin slicing, because they were able to pick up on abnormalities in the statue that their experience had taught them and they were able to make a conclusion based upon that. Thin slicing occurs in what the book calls the “locked door”, or our unconscious mind. One caveat is that while a trained mind is able to accurately thin slice, the reasons for the conclusion that one’s subconscious ends up on are often unknown to the person. An example is the case of Vic Braden, who is a world renowned tennis player. Vic is able to know exactly when a tennis player is about to mess up on a serve, but he can’t delineate what part of the server’s mechanics leads him to that conclusion. The unconscious is a very powerful tool and another one of its abilities is to prime the body based on visual cues. The author cites a study in which the subjects were to read a sentence with subtle hits at elderliness. The readers’ unconscious region of the brain then picks up on these hints and as a result, when the reader left the room, the demeanor of his walk was similar to that of an old person. This is known as priming and it is something else that the unconscious part of our mind can do. 
	Another example of thin slicing prevailing over careful research is in the case of Paul Van Riper and the Millenium Challenge. This was a simulation in which Riper was playing the part of a rogue militant. The US team would have access to state of the art military technology, while Riper’s team had outdated or very basic technology. In the end, Riper won the challenge due to the fact that thin slicing all his decisions gave Riper the advantage in terms of decision speed, since the other group would move slowly and would take into consideration every piece of data, no matter how gratuitous it may be. The next aspect of thin slicing the book considers is that sometimes, the untrained mind can thin slice incorrectly due to a lack of knowledge or experience. This is demonstrated in the case of Kenna Zemendkun. He is a musician that many record produces and musicians love; however, his music was not acclaimed by the regular people that listened to it in test groups. For this reason, his music was not played on the radio and he was not able to garner much success. The reason was because Kenna’s music was new and that the normal mind was not able to make sense of it, leading them to thin slice it in a negative way. The final example that the book presents us is in the case when thin slicing fails to work. This occurs under situations of high stress, when we are not able to focus on the facial expressions of others. This essentially renders us temporarily autistic and leads to worse judgement as a result. 
	An example in my life that reflects the subject matter is when I play soccer. In the book, the author says that when one starts trying to go through the reasons for why his or her unconscious mind did something, the person’s performance suffers as a result. In short, if you think about it too much, it’ll end up hurting you. When I first started playing soccer, this was my predicament. Whenever the ball came to me, I would look around, trying to gather as much information as possible and make a decision based on this information. However, like the US in the war game, this took far too much time and I ended up messing up. Eventually, through experience, I have learned to take an account of my surroundings before the ball came and make decisions hastily, giving me time to react and execute. This led to a much higher rate of success for me. 
	Another example in my life that reflects the subject matter is when it comes to music taste. Usually when I listen to a song, within 10 seconds, I am able to deduce whether I like the song or not. This is because my unconscious thin slices the song, seeing if it matches the criteria that constitute a good song for me. However, it is quite hard to pinpoint exactly what this criteria is. This is discussed in detail in the book, such as in the case of the tennis serves.
	One important detail that the book stresses over and over again is that the mind can learn to become better at thin slicing through repeated exposure. For instance, it says that one can even learn to thin slice effectively in times of high stress to avoid making fatal errors. Some security companies repeatedly subject their employees to these kinds of tests to make them have good judgement in stressful situations. In the book, it is also stated that if one takes the time to learn the complexities of the human face, it is possible to thin slice what a person is feeling according to their facial expressions. Even when a person is trying to fake their facial expressions, it is possible to gather data on how the person is actually feeling. My question is whether it’s possible for the reverse to be true. Is it possible for a person to train their face to completely fake an expression that can throw off even the most experienced face reader about his or her emotional state? If this were to happen, it would be much easier for criminals to get away with lying in court. It would also address a privacy concerns about reading into other people’s minds.
	The final question I have towards the subject matter discussed is that is there a way to get people with autism to correct some of their shortcomings by staying calm? My reasoning behind this question lies in the fact that the book portrays those with autism as those who are unable to read the facial expressions of humans and as a result, can not comprehend emotions being conveyed through facial expressions. The author also states that people without autism do this when they are in a stressful situation that causes their heart rate to jump. My question is that since it is easier for people without autism to thin slice when they are relaxed and have a low heart rate, is it possible to slowly cultivate this ability in people with autism through therapy in which they are subjected to a low stress environment?
	













	
